# day 4- july 18, 2025

## OSI Model

### 1. what is the OSI model?:
- Open Systems Interconnection Model.
- An essiential framework for understanding network communication.
- Provides a framework on how all networked devices communicate.
- Send, receive, and interpret data across networks.
- encapsulates the process of data transmission into seven distinct layers. Data travels through these layers, each level adds a piece of information to the data packet.
### 2. OSI Model Layers:
#### - **Layer 1: Physical Layer**
  - Deals with the physical connection between devices.
  - Examples: Cables, switches, and network interface cards (NICs).
  - Easiest level to understand.
  - Raw bit transmission.
  - examples: Ethernet cables, fiber optics, and wireless signals.

#### - **Layer 2: Data Link Layer**
    - Recieves raw bits from the physical layer and organizes them into frames.
    - Gets the data ready for transmission.
    - Ensures error-free transmission between devices on the same network.
    - *Mac addresses are used* to identify devices at this layer.
    - NAC (Network Interface Card) operates at this layer.
        - NAC is like a bouncer at a club—it checks every device trying to join your network and enforces security rules before granting access.

#### - **Layer 3: Network Layer**
    - Responsible for routing and re-assembling data packets.
    - Determines the **best path for data** to travel across networks.
    - Uses logical addressing **(IP addresses)** to identify devices.
    - **Routers operate** at this layer. Also known as Layer 3 devices.
        - Routers are like traffic cops for data packets, directing them to their destination based on IP addresses.
    - OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) is a routing protocol that operates at this layer.
        - OSPF is like a GPS for data packets, finding the best route through the network.
    - RIP (Routing Information Protocol) is another routing protocol that operates at this layer.
    - RIP decides after considering these:
        - What are the shortest paths? i.e. the least number of hops/travel for the packets.
        - Most reliable path? i.e. have the path lost packets before?
        - Which one is fastest physically? i.e. is it a fiber optic cable or a copper wire?

#### - **Layer 4: Transport Layer**
    - Manages the transmission of data between devices.
    Uses two main protocols:
        - **TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)**: Ensures reliable, ordered, and error-checked delivery of data, synchronizing the sender and receiver.
            - If one packet is lost, TCP will resend it, ensuring all packets arrive in the correct order. 
            - If one chunk is not recieved then the entire transmission is stopped and the data can not be used until the missing chunk is resent.
            - Used for applications where data integrity is crucial, like web browsing, emails and file transfers.
        - **UDP (User Datagram Protocol)**: Provides faster, connectionless communication without error-checking.
        - Not advance compared to its brother TCP.
        - Used for applications where speed is more important than reliability, like video streaming and online gaming.
        - No error checking, so if a packet is lost, it won't be resent.
        - Any data sent go to the destination whether it is lost or not.
        - no synchronization between sender and receiver.
        - Used in small data transfers like ARP and DHCP.
        - Used for large file transfer like a video where a few lost packets won't matter.

#### - **Layer 5: Session Layer**
    - When layer 4 is done, it is the session layer's job to keep the connection open. When layer 6 job is done, it sent the data to the session.
    - Session's job is to start a connection, keep it open, and close it when done to the computer which is destined to recieve the data.
    - When the connection is established, we call is a session.
    - Also responsible for closing the session if not used for a long time.
    - Session has checkpoints. After a chechpoint, if the connection is lost, it can resume from that point instead of starting over.
    - Sessions are unique meaning data can not travel to the wrong session.

#### - **Layer 6: Presentation Layer**
    - This is where standardization happens.
    - A software developer can create any software e.g. an email client differently, but the data still needs to be presented in a standard way- no matter how a software works.
    - This layer serves as a translator to and for the application layer.
    - The recieveing device will also understant data sent from a device that uses a different format.E.g. when you sent a an email, the other user may use a different email client, but the data is still presented in a standard way.
    - It is also responsible for data compression and encryption.

#### - **Layer 7: Application Layer**
    - The topmost layer where end-user applications operate.
    - Protocols and rules are in place to determine how the user should interact with data sent or received.
    - Everyday applications such as email clients, browsers, or file server browsing software such as FileZilla provide a friendly, Graphical User Interface (GUI) for users to interact with data sent or received. Other protocols include DNS (Domain Name System), which is how website addresses are translated into IP addresses. 